
A Sacred Connection to the Sun

I believe in the sun. In the tangle of human failures of greed, fear, and forgetfulness, the sun gives me clarity. When explorers first encountered my people, they called us heathens, sun worshippers. They didn’t understand that the sun is a relative and illuminates our path on this earth.
Many of us continue ceremonies that ensure a connection with the sun. After dancing all night in a circle we realize that we are a part of a larger sense of stars and planets dancing with us overhead. When the sun rises at the apex of the ceremony, we are renewed. There is no mistaking this connection, though Wal-Mart might be just down the road. Humans are vulnerable and rely on the kindnesses of the earth and the sun; we exist together in a sacred field of meaning.

A few weeks ago I visited some friends at a pueblo for a feast day celebration. The runners were up at dawn and completed a ceremonial race that ensures that the sun will continue to return. It is a humble and necessary act of respect. And because the celebration continues, the sun, the earth and these humans are still together in a harmonious relationship.
Our earth is shifting. We can all see it. I hear from my Inuit and Yupik relatives up north that everything has changed. It’s so hot; there is not enough winter. Animals are confused. Ice is melting.
The quantum physicists have it right; they are beginning to think like Indians: Everything is connected dynamically at an intimate level. When you remember this, then the current wobble of the earth makes sense. How much more oil can be drained without replacement, without reciprocity?
One day, recently I walked out of a hotel room just off Times Square at dawn to find the sun. It was the fourth morning since the birth of my fourth granddaughter. This was the morning I was to present her to the sun, as a relative, as one of us. It was still dark, overcast as I walked through Times Square. I stood beneath a 21st century totem pole of symbols of multinational corporations, made of flash and neon.

The sun rose up over the city, but I couldn’t see it amidst the rain. Though I was not at home, bundling up the baby to carry her outside, I carried this newborn girl within the cradleboard of my heart. I held her up and presented her to the sun, so she would be recognized as a relative, so that she won’t forget this connection, this promise, so that we all remember the sacredness of life.


Call it Fear

There is this edge where shadows 
and bones of some of us walk 
backwards. 
Talk backwards. There is this edge 
call it an ocean of fear of the dark. Or 
name it with other songs. Under our ribs 
our hearts are bloody stars. Shine on 
shine on, and horses in their galloping flight 
strike the curve of ribs. 
Heartbeat 
and breathe back back sharply. Breathe 
backwards. 

There is this edge within me 
I saw it once 
an August Sunday morning when the heat hadn't 
left this earth. And Goodluck 
sat sleeping next to me in the truck. 
We had never broken through the edge of the 
singing at four a.m. 
We had only wanted to talk, to hear 
any other voice to stay alive. 
And there was this edge-- 
not the drop of sandy rock cliff 
bones of volcanic earth into 
Albuquerque. 

Not that, 
but a string of shadow horses kicking 
and pulling me out of my belly, 
not into the Rio Grande but into the music 
barely coming through 
Sunday church singing 
from the radio. Battery worn-down but the voices 
talking backwards. 

White Bear

She begins to board the flight 
to Albuquerque. Late night. 
But stops in the corrugated tunnel, 
a space between leaving and staying, 
where the night sky catches 
approaching herself from here to 
there, Tulsa or New York 
with knives or corn meal. 

The last flight someone talked 
about how coming from Seattle 
the pilot flew a circle 
over Mt. St. Helens; she sat 
quiet. (But had seen the eruption 
as the earth beginning 
to come apart, as in birth 
out of violence.) 

She watches the yellow lights 
of towns below the airplane flicker, 
fade and fall backwards. Somewhere, 
she dreamed, there is the white bear 
moving down from the north, motioning her paws 
like a long arctic night, that kind 
of circle and the whole world balanced in 
between carved of ebony and ice 
oh so hard 
the clear black nights 
like her daughter's eyes, and the white 
bear moon, cupped like an ivory rocking 
cradle, tipping back it could go 
either way 
all darkness 
is open to light. 

Ah, Ah Related Poem Content Details
BY JOY HARJO
for Lurline McGregor
Ah, ah cries the crow arching toward the heavy sky over the marina. 
Lands on the crown of the palm tree. 

Ah, ah slaps the urgent cove of ocean swimming through the slips. 
We carry canoes to the edge of the salt. 

Ah, ah groans the crew with the weight, the winds cutting skin. 
We claim our seats. Pelicans perch in the draft for fish. 

Ah, ah beats our lungs and we are racing into the waves. 
Though there are worlds below us and above us, we are straight ahead. 

Ah, ah tattoos the engines of your plane against the sky—away from these waters. 
Each paddle stroke follows the curve from reach to loss. 

Ah, ah calls the sun from a fishing boat with a pale, yellow sail. We fly by 
on our return, over the net of eternity thrown out for stars. 

Ah, ah scrapes the hull of my soul. Ah, ah.

An American Sunrise 

We were running out of breath, as we ran out to meet ourselves. We
were surfacing the edge of our ancestors’ fights, and ready to strike.
It was difficult to lose days in the Indian bar if you were straight.
Easy if you played pool and drank to remember to forget. We
made plans to be professional — and did. And some of us could sing
so we drummed a fire-lit pathway up to those starry stars. Sin
was invented by the Christians, as was the Devil, we sang. We
were the heathens, but needed to be saved from them — thin
chance. We knew we were all related in this story, a little gin
will clarify the dark and make us all feel like dancing. We
had something to do with the origins of blues and jazz
I argued with a Pueblo as I filled the jukebox with dimes in June,
forty years later and we still want justice. We are still America. We
know the rumors of our demise. We spit them out. They die
soon.

Eagle Poem 

To pray you open your whole self 
To sky, to earth, to sun, to moon 
To one whole voice that is you. 
And know there is more 
That you can’t see, can’t hear; 
Can’t know except in moments 
Steadily growing, and in languages 
That aren’t always sound but other 
Circles of motion. 
Like eagle that Sunday morning 
Over Salt River. Circled in blue sky 
In wind, swept our hearts clean 
With sacred wings. 
We see you, see ourselves and know 
That we must take the utmost care 
And kindness in all things. 
Breathe in, knowing we are made of 
All this, and breathe, knowing 
We are truly blessed because we 
Were born, and die soon within a 
True circle of motion, 
Like eagle rounding out the morning 
Inside us. 
We pray that it will be done 
In beauty. 
In beauty.

Grace 

I think of Wind and her wild ways the year we had nothing to lose and lost it anyway in the cursed country of the fox. We still talk about that winter, how the cold froze imaginary buffalo on the stuffed horizon of snowbanks. The haunting voices of the starved and mutilated broke fences, crashed our thermostat dreams, and we couldn’t stand it one more time. So once again we lost a winter in stubborn memory, walked through cheap apartment walls, skated through fields of ghosts into a town that never wanted us, in the epic search for grace.

Like Coyote, like Rabbit, we could not contain our terror and clowned our way through a season of false midnights. We had to swallow that town with laughter, so it would go down easy as honey. And one morning as the sun struggled to break ice, and our dreams had found us with coffee and pancakes in a truck stop along Highway 80, we found grace.
   
I could say grace was a woman with time on her hands, or a white buffalo escaped from memory. But in that dingy light it was a promise of balance. We once again understood the talk of animals, and spring was lean and hungry with the hope of children and corn.
   
I would like to say, with grace, we picked ourselves up and walked into the spring thaw. We didn’t; the next season was worse. You went home to Leech Lake to work with the tribe and I went south. And, Wind, I am still crazy. I know there is something larger than the memory of a dispossessed people. We have seen it.

A Map to the Next World 

In the last days of the fourth world I wished to make a map for 
those who would climb through the hole in the sky. 

My only tools were the desires of humans as they emerged 
from the killing fields, from the bedrooms and the kitchens. 

For the soul is a wanderer with many hands and feet. 

The map must be of sand and can’t be read by ordinary light. It 
must carry fire to the next tribal town, for renewal of spirit. 

In the legend are instructions on the language of the land, how it 
was we forgot to acknowledge the gift, as if we were not in it or of it. 

Take note of the proliferation of supermarkets and malls, the 
altars of money. They best describe the detour from grace. 

Keep track of the errors of our forgetfulness; the fog steals our 
children while we sleep. 

Flowers of rage spring up in the depression. Monsters are born 
there of nuclear anger. 

Trees of ashes wave good-bye to good-bye and the map appears to 
disappear. 

We no longer know the names of the birds here, how to speak to 
them by their personal names. 

Once we knew everything in this lush promise. 

What I am telling you is real and is printed in a warning on the 
map. Our forgetfulness stalks us, walks the earth behind us, leav- 
ing a trail of paper diapers, needles, and wasted blood. 

An imperfect map will have to do, little one. 

The place of entry is the sea of your mother’s blood, your father’s 
small death as he longs to know himself in another. 

There is no exit. 

The map can be interpreted through the wall of the intestine—a 
spiral on the road of knowledge. 

You will travel through the membrane of death, smell cooking 
from the encampment where our relatives make a feast of fresh 
deer meat and corn soup, in the Milky Way. 

They have never left us; we abandoned them for science. 

And when you take your next breath as we enter the fifth world 
there will be no X, no guidebook with words you can carry. 

You will have to navigate by your mother’s voice, renew the song 
she is singing. 

Fresh courage glimmers from planets. 

And lights the map printed with the blood of history, a map you 
will have to know by your intention, by the language of suns. 

When you emerge note the tracks of the monster slayers where they 
entered the cities of artificial light and killed what was killing us. 

You will see red cliffs. They are the heart, contain the ladder. 

A white deer will greet you when the last human climbs from the 
destruction. 

Remember the hole of shame marking the act of abandoning our 
tribal grounds. 

We were never perfect. 

Yet, the journey we make together is perfect on this earth who was 
once a star and made the same mistakes as humans. 

We might make them again, she said. 

Crucial to finding the way is this: there is no beginning or end. 

You must make your own map.

My House is the Red Earth 

My house is the red earth; it could be the center of the world. I’ve heard New York, Paris, or Tokyo called the center of the world, but I say it is magnificently humble. You could drive by and miss it. Radio waves can obscure it. Words cannot construct it, for there are some sounds left to sacred wordless form. For instance, that fool crow, picking through trash near the corral, understands the center of the world as greasy strips of fat. Just ask him. He doesn’t have to say that the earth has turned scarlet through fierce belief, after centuries of heartbreak and laughter—he perches on the blue bowl of the sky, and laughs.

Perhaps the World Ends Here 

The world begins at a kitchen table. No matter what, we must eat to live. 

The gifts of earth are brought and prepared, set on the table. So it has been since creation, and it will go on. 

We chase chickens or dogs away from it. Babies teethe at the corners. They scrape their knees under it. 

It is here that children are given instructions on what it means to be human. We make men at it, we make women. 

At this table we gossip, recall enemies and the ghosts of lovers. 

Our dreams drink coffee with us as they put their arms around our children. They laugh with us at our poor falling-down selves and as we put ourselves back together once again at the table. 

This table has been a house in the rain, an umbrella in the sun. 

Wars have begun and ended at this table. It is a place to hide in the shadow of terror. A place to celebrate the terrible victory. 

We have given birth on this table, and have prepared our parents for burial here. 

At this table we sing with joy, with sorrow. We pray of suffering and remorse. We give thanks. 

Perhaps the world will end at the kitchen table, while we are laughing and crying, eating of the last sweet bite.