Medieval Textile Study Group

For articles/samples starting with the March 2000 issue,
please send 20 copies. Madelyn V is an observer for the
year, and I do not think our number is going to be static.

Business:
I think from now on, the December issue will be the “fat”
issue, with all samples due at that time. This will simplify
mailing as the main post office will take overseas packages
and larger letters, but the substation will only take
small, flat letters. Making a rule like this also simplifies
life for the membership, as you will know, that if your
contribution(s) includea sample, that it will be due in
November for the December issue, and can plan accordingly.

Next Year’s Project: Twills
I have 2 ideas for this. One is to just exchange twill
samples. Now, if you are saying “How exciting is
that(?)!!” remember twills are the most common weave of
the period, fancier cloth being used for the finery of larger
churches, noble’s clothes, or for clothes for special
occasions if the wearer had enough money to afford such
finery.

The second idea is IF 12 people will do samples (OK, for
those with many shafts, you may pick another weave), and
all the samples are three inches square, instead of the
December issue per se, I will put together a calendar for
the following year (2001) with the sample and information
on one page, the calendar page on the back, and
bound so that it opens like a book. Though the samples
will have to be mailed in, the information can be e-mailed
(name, what you wove, colors, materials, sett, etc) so that
I’ll have the calendar set up and waiting for the samples.
Let me know which option you prefer, and tell me what
you’re weaving. This is an opportunity also for you
spinners to spin & weave samples utilizing s/z spun
singles, and dyers to try some of those natural dyes.
For those without issue 9, or who like to have everything
before them, here is a synopsis of weaves of wool textiles
present in London deposits of c. 1150 - 1450:

2:1 Twill:
z-spun: 20 (1301-1350) 9 (1351-1400)
z/s spun: 3 (1251-1300) 136 (1301-1350) 5 (1351-1400)
s spun: 1 (1151-1200) 4 (1301-1350) 4 (1351-1400)
2:2 Twill:
z-spun: 3 (1251-1300) 27 (1301-1350) 37 (1351-1400)
z/s spun: 7 (1301-1350) 3 (1351-1400) 1 (1401-1450)
s spun: 1 (1301-1350) 1 (1401-1450)
3:3 Twill:
z spun: 4 (1301-1350) 2 (1351-1400) 1 (1401-1450)
Tabby with weft faced bands:
54 (1301-1350) 35 (1351-1400) 2 (1401-1450)

the first number being the quantity of samples and the
numbers in parenthesis being dates of the layers the
quantity was found within. Taken from the Museum of
London’s Textiles and Clothing c. 1150-1450, (c) 1992
“The universally brown appearance of so many of these
fragments gives no idea of the variety of the colours
which from written descriptions must have been vividly
present - sanguin, vermillion, crimson, violet, red, yellow,
green, azure, murrey, russet, grey, perse (dark blue) - or
the ‘exotic dyeing’ and ‘subtle blending of colour’ which
recent study suggests was so important a feature of
English cloth exports of the 13th and 14th centuries
(Bridbury 1982, 103).” (ibid)

So, you are not limited to brown or white in your weaving,
either.

That’s 8 types of twills, if everyone would pick one and
some pick another weave of the period, the calendar
would be a good goal. I have included a form to fill out at
the end of the newsletter, in which you may indicate your
first & second preferences in twill weaving, and what
your topics of your article(s) and dates will be. Not
everyone got around to doing their article this year, and
not everyone noted what they are interested in. Please do
this on the form.

Back Issue Availability:

You may have noticed the format has changed a bit. This
is because I’m going to a new/old program that allows me
to save the newsletter not only in a printable onto paper
format, but in the Adobe PDF format. This format is used
by the US Government for its tax forms and etc. because
Adobe makes available to everyone for free their Adobe
PDF Reader (among other considerations). This means,
from this issue foreward, I can put the issues onto a CD or
disk and mail either paper copies or a CD or disk to those
who want back issues. I cannot do this with previous
issues because of copyright problems. Copyrights allow
for ‘spontaneous’ copying for personal or educational
purposes. This would cover the original copying of
materials, but I don’t think that it covers a second printing
into a new medium (electronic). Because of this, and
because as of this coming year the study groups will be
submitting articles for the new Complex Weavers’ Journal
(previously Complex Weavers Newsletter) please give
credit where credit is due for quotes in your articles. And,
if the quotes are “substantive” let me know ahead of time
so that I may attempt to get permission to use them (or
you can... the internet makes this much easier as most
publishers have an e-mail address).

Handouts:
The first is on Ikat. The examples are 19th Century, but
the technique is very old.
The name ikat comes from the Malay-Indonesian word
mengikat which means “to bind, tie, or wind around”.
From Japan, India and Middle East, where the first ikat
textiles were made between the fifth and tenth centuries,
the technique has spread all over the world.
To Japan ikat came probably from China where it could
have also originated. By contrast to other areas ikat in
Japan has steadily evolved, especially during the last four
centuries. A remakable number of unique variations of the
ikat technique have arisen there.
 Beside the Middle East, Central Asia and Iran are
important ikat centers. The skill of making ikat is also
known in Africa and South and Middle America.But of
all the ikat areas in the old world the best known is
Indonesia.

 The first European ikat centers were in Italy probably
developed under influence from the Middle East. It also
played an important role in the French metropolitan
fashion in the eighteenth century. Ikat has also been
practised in some Greek villages and it formed part of
traditional costume in certain Swiss mountain hamlets.
Other ikat areas in Europe were Germany, Austria and
Mallorca, where the technique is still being used. In
northern Europe small spot decorations in ikat were made
in Estonia, Latvia, Finland, Sweden, Norway, and
Denmark. Larger flame and lozenge patterns are known
only from Finland, where the technique was introduced by
the Swedish people in the eighteenth century. These
cloths were used for peasant costumes and furniture
coverings especially in the western Finland, where ikat
also was widely used for decorating the folk drekts.
Several sources I examined on the internet claim that
there are three types of ikat, but I have only found
descriptions of two of them, and Bali seems to be the best
modern location to find these.

The first is warp ikat usually woven in silk. This ikat was
found in many parts of Bali and usually used to make
saput or outer sarongs or scarves worn on ceremonial
occasions. While most warp ikat is silk, one finds in Bali
a sacred cloth usually said to be woven on the island of
Nusa Penida that is a warp cotton ikat.

The second type is woven of warp and weft threads which
have been expertly dyed to overlap and interact.. Known
as double ikat, the process is frightfully difficult and
requires both expertise and patience to align the two
patterns. Selvedges of this sort of ikat are rarely even near
to being streight for obvious reasons.

The second handout from the Field Museum has little to
do with textiles. Its meant as a item for thought. Cartier is
well known for taking images and motifs from ancient
civilizations and using them in new ways to create
fashionable jewelry. Why are you studying Medieval
Textiles? What are YOU doing with the methods and
motifs of the Medieval period? How are you utilizing
them and incorporating them into your fabrics you are
using for household items, clothing, etc? Let me know,
and I’ll put your answers in an upcoming newsletter.
(Even if all you are doing is hording slavishly copied
‘samplers’ of textiles from the period, I do want to know).

Aztec Textiles
By Nancy M. McKenna

When Conquistador Francisco Pizarro ransomed the
Incan ruler Atahualpa, Atahualpa readily supplied the
room full of gold and two rooms full of silver asked of
him. Although the metals were readily crafted into
pleasing forms, they had no intrinsic value to the Inca.
Rather, the coin of the realm was the extraordinary woven
cloth, each piece representing thousands of man hours of
work. As a form of wealth, it was traded and given as
gifts between rulers, and even burned or sacrificed as
offerings

The Incas grew and used cotton; raised llamas as beasts of
burden, food, and for their wool for weaving slings and
sacks; raised alpacas for their soft wool for clothing; and
hunted wild vicuna for wool for the garments of the elite.
Most people wore simple tunics made of cotton or alpaca
cloth. The finest cloth or cumbi was reserved for the Sapa
Inca (Supreme Inca), his family & privileged individuals.
Professional male weavers and wives of provincial
officials produced cumbi as a tax payment; special
garments intended for sacred rites worn by the emperor
usually came from the skilled hands of women in religious
service. An elaborate tapestry tunic could have as
many as 400 ends per inch. Woven patterns varied greatly
from location to location, and because the Inca forbade
changes in regional dress when they conquered a rival
city, the place of origin for a textile can be ascertained by
the pattern and methods of weaving.

The looms used were backstrap looms not unlike those
used today, however the warp is not directly connected to
the bars, but to a small cord running parallel to the bars
and attached to the bar at intervals. The entire warp is
exposed as this loom does not have a warp beam. The
warp ends went from one cord to the other in a wrapping
or lacing movement. Because of this, the woven pieces are
small and have 4 selvedge edges. In instances where wool
and cotton are used, the cotton is warp and the wool is
weft. According to D’Harcourt, here are no exceptions to
this rule.

The type of Peruvian weaving demonstrated here was
from Coastal Peru, and at least in the case of the Johnson
textiles, were purchased in Lima, Peru. As D’Harcourt
and others have published texts including textiles from
Incan cities no further North than Ancon, and this weave
is not found among them, I assume this style of weaving
was to be found north of Lima, and the textiles were
brought to Lima for sale to tourists. These ornate ancient
textiles are found with Peruvian mummies only, the
“everyday” cloth being primarily tabby with little ornamentation.
From examination of such texts, and discussion
with Ed Franqumont, these cloths may have come
from the Chancay area burial ground, which was in use
from about 1200 to about 1300 AD.

The Making of Medieval Wall Covering
By Martin Weatherhead, Snail Trail Handweavers
This article first appeared in The Journal for Spinners,
Dyers, & Weavers (UK) and is printed here with permission
of the author.

Beware of friendly voices that say “Dear Boy, can you just
weave a length of fabric for me?”. They are luring you
into a trap. Before gaily saying yes, ask a few questions.
I knew the voice, it was David Redpath, a friend from a
local woollen mill who had taken up natural dyeing as a
business. So I said yes.

Then the trouble began. Sixty five yards! Well, I had
done three curtain lengths for a conference centre totalling
100 yards. The longest length was forty yards so why
not an extra twenty five? When do they want it finished?
 Three weeks! .......... for an Easter opening ..... and the
yarn not even dyed.

The full story slowly emerged. The fabric was for Barley
Hall, a partially reconstructed Medieval building in York.
Hidden under a mixture of different periods, the building
was about to be converted to offices. Recognising its
importance, the York Archaeological Trust decided to
rescue it and make a reconstruction of the missing bits,
using traditional techniques. The timbers were jointed
and pegged with no nails or screws. A special tile-kiln
Inca bird motif, warp runs right to left
was made, based on archaeological evidence, and all the
tiles were hand made fired and hung on the roof with
wooden pegs. The window panes were to be filled with
horn, made by heating and flattening cow horns. The aim
was for everything was to be truly authentic.

When it came to fitting out it was decided that there
should be wall hangings, a sort of up-market wallpaper,
hand-woven and dyed with natural dyes of course. The
fabric was a “paled sey”. A paled fabric has broad
vertical stripes (a pale as in palings, also a heraldic term).
The colour was to be red and green, as shown in illustrations
of the period. The fabric construction was based on
a lead customs seal found in Bristol Docks where fabric
was a major export. The fabric itself had rotted away but
it had been imprinted on the lead seal. It turned out to be
a 2/2 twill set at 48 epi. using a two-ply yarn. When you
think how fine that is, then think how fine the singles
were that went up to make the two plies and this would
all have been handspun in 1480 on a spindle wheel with
no flyer or bobbin. Documentary evidence shows that the
tenant at the time was Alderman William Snawsell,
goldsmith and former lord mayor, someone who could
afford such an expensive fabric.

When it came to the reproduction nobody was prepared to
spin that much fine yarn, so a fine 2/32’s worsted was
chosen. The dyeing was done by David & Margaret
Redpath, Renaissance Dying. Madder with an alum
mordant gave a very rich red. The green was weld,
overdyed with indigo. All this was done as part of the
three week deadline.

In the meantime, I had woven a 4" wide sample for
approval. At this point another problem became apparent.
To give a finished fabric at 36"” I needed to weave at
40"” to allow for shrinkage. At 48 epi that made 1920
ends. Even on all eight shafts of my loom I didn’t have
that many headdles! A desperate call to Harris Looms in
Ashford had an extra 500 headdles up the next day in the
post.

The warp was wound on an industrial warping mill at
Wallis Woollen Mill. In the rush to meet the deadline
only just enough yarn was dyed for the warp, the rest
could be dyed as the loom was dressed. Winding in 2"”
sections meant having 96 cones of each colour. Towards
the end there was a constant stopping as one cone ran out
and a fuller one had to be split and re-wound into two. It
eventually took all day to wind the warp. I built a special
cradle to fit my sectional beam to the warping mill and in
the middle of the night it was finally beamed.

Back home to threading 1920 ends. At least it was a
simple 2/2 twill using a straight draft on all eight shafts.
Sleyed at 4 ends per dent in a 12 dpi reed. A mere
thirteen hours and a very stiff neck. All together it had
taken three days to wind the warp and dress the loom.
For the weaving I decided to use a fly shuttle for speed.
As the fly shuttle was invented by John Kay in 1738 I was
going to lose a bit of authenticity but that had to be
sacrificed in order to meet the deadline. I am glad to say
that the fabric had a single colour weft, the same gorgeous
rich madder red as in the warp. To ensure the minimum
variation in colour on each length, enough yarn was died
in a single batch to weave a full length of three yards.
A major advantage to the fly shuttle is its use of an endfeed
bobbin that feeds yarn out smoothly into the shed and
can hold a great length of yarn. I started out hand
winding the bobbins but a trial showed that I could use
pirns, an industrial system that winds the weft onto a
short stub and then round a central shaft that is removed
leaving tightly wound yarn with a hollow core. That
meant that an even larger quantity of yarn could be
packed into each pirn. I could see that this was going to
save a lot of time, but it did mean driving backwards and
forwards to the Museum of the Welsh Woollen Industry
where I could make use of their pirn winders. The pirns
were all colour coded and as each dye batch arrived it was
wound and kept separate. It took a total of six hours to
wind all the pirns.

Back to the loom and it was head down and into the fray.
By the time you have threaded 1920 red and green threads
the colours begin to pall a bit, but there they are again, all
nice and tight, waiting to be woven. Much to
my surprise there were only about half a dozen crossed
over between the shafts and reed. I had had quite a time
when I first started using this fly-shuttle as the shuttle
would for ever jam in the box or miss and bounce back
into the shed. It was all a matter of timing the throw just
as the beater swung forwards. That way the shuttle is
pushed against the reed where the maximum shed lies.
After a few wobbly inches I soon settled down to a nice
even beat and throw and got into my stride.

When weaving fine fabric it’s important to keep an even
beat and a regular rhythm as this gives an even fabric. I
found that trying to make a pick in time with the natural
swing of the beater was too fast for the pedal change.
Though possible, I couldn’t keep it up continuously. It
was best to swing the beater twice for every pick. This
gave enough time to change shed without having to rush
and the rhythm was easy to keep up. As a by-product
the second swing helped to clear the shed and pack down
the weft, which in the end only reached 36/38 ppi. Trying
extra warp tension and excessive beating achieved 48 ppi
but was not practical for continuous weaving.

Every now and then there would be a short pause to wind
on, unflatten my bottom and stretch my back, or sleep!
Nearly one hundred hours were spent weaving the fabric
and towards the end the cloth beam was getting so fat
that I wondered if it would jam the lams and pedals.
It’s never worth going on weaving when there is a broken
end or a knot in the weft. This may be fine for a coarse
fabric, but at 48 epi you need a magnifying glass to darn
mistakes. I thought it would be all right to leave it for an
inch and then catch in the broken end. I paid the penalty
afterwards as twills tend to close up and make it doubly
difficult to darn into the correct place.

I am very lucky in having two warp beams on my loom.
To mend and burl I took the cloth beam out and fitted it
into one of the warp beam slots. I then took it round a
table and back onto the other warp beam. That way I
was able to keep the fabric under control and have a good
surface to look for faults. It took a total of sixteen hours
to make all the mends. The worst was a broken end
which I missed that ran for nearly 12". The roll was
turned over and run through again to pick up any last
faults and then re-rolled and sent off to the finishers, not a
knot to be seen or felt.

Finishing was done by a commercial firm in Scotland,
one of the few that is still able to finish fabric to a width
of 36". Once finished it was then taken by the Redpaths
up to York to be cut and hemmed to the correct length.
 As Medieval walls are not straight each piece had to be
cut to fit. The final sacrilege was to nail the fabric to the
walls by specially hand forged authentic tenter hooks.
We made it for the opening, but never again!
Later in the Summer I had another call ........”Dear boy,
could you do some curtains for Barley Hall?”. So I did.

Guatemalen Spindle Whorls
by Nancy M McKenna

Enclosed, you will find something you may think odd. A
spindle whorl, made out of Permastone (TM). This is a
material that the manufacturer advertises as “waterproof,
weather, and scratch resistant.” If that’s an odd material
for such things, here’s the story. I made these copies from
two whorls I recently purchased.

I attanded a fiber event in Freeport, Illinois earlier this
year to learn how to knit. While there, I bought two
whorls. Per the seller, they believe these were “purchased
in the 1980s in Central America, the city of
Chichicastenango, Guatemala, in the Quiche district. I
believe that they are rare, very, very old, and were
probably used for supported spindle spinning.”
I think these were made in the 20th century, and I actually
origionally wrote out my thought process based upon my
having been a potter and pottery instructor, and experience
with clays. However, shortly before the final printing
of this newsletter, I recieved the name and address of the
person who may have been the origional purchaser of
these whorls in Guatemala for the purpose of bringing
them back to the United States. I have sent him a letter,
and have not recieved a reply. In case he has details that I
do not know about, I am reserving my opinion until he
replies.

In the mold making I put a soda straw into the hole in the
origional whorls so as to preserve the hole in the whorl
while painting it with latex. Unlike Crayola molding
material, latex takes many coats, each of which takes
about an hour to dry, and cheese cloth has to be embedded
into the mold to make it strong enough. The holes are off
center and at an angle in the origionals, and this is the
same for the casts. So, if you cannot find a piece of dowel
rod the exact size of the hole, stop in your local fast food
outlet and check out their straws. They may carry just the
right size, and you can stick it into the hole and try
spinning on one of these yourself. I did, and a little piece
of the resultant yarn is attached. As not much changes
thru the centuries in the “back woods” of Central and
South America, and the size and weight of these are
compatable with the size and weight of those found in
archeological digs, I would say that they are very simular
to those used to spin all fibers in pre-columbian Guatemala
(which corresponds to the European Medieval
period). Happy spinning.

American “Medieval” (pre-columbian)
Yarns
by Nancy M McKenna
“Anasazi is a Navajo word (roughly meaning “ancient
enimies”) for the poople who used ot live on the Colorado
Plateau south of the Colorado River and who (in later
stages) built the free-standing pueblos and cliff dwellings
in the region (ironically, long before the Navajos arrived).
Within the broader category of Anasazi cultures, which
included groups that lived in the region from about 100
BC to about AD 1300, archeologists distinguish different
Basketmaker and Pueblo phases. Modern Pueblo Indians
are believed to be descended from the Anasazi.
Cordage, preserved by the region’s dry climate, is a
common artifact found in many archeological sites of the
Colorado Plateau. One particular site on private property
in southeastern Utah, near Blanding, revealed what was
once a sandal “factory,” with caches of fiber, tools,
cordage, and sandals in various stages of preparation
(including a last for shaping and sizing footwear, similar
to those used by modern shoemakers). “ **

Several native plant fibers were used by the Native
Americans during this period. One was the fiber from the
yucca plant. This plant is evergreen, with long spiky
leaves. It thrives in most gardens as it tolerates and
thrives in almost full sun to full shade. From the edges of
the leaves tendrils of fiber extend and curl in mature
specimens, which may have given the people the idea of
using this plant. Unlike other plants used, processing
these leaves, though time consuming, produces the most
usable fiber per leaf. (future articles may cover other
plants used in this time period)

To make fiber from the leaves, cut the leaves off the main
stem, leaving them as long as possible. Pack them into a
pressure cooker, and process according to manufacturer’s
reccomendation for about three hours. Older models will
require much more water than newer models. If you don’t
have a pressure cooker, you will need to cook the leaves
about three days, according to the article by Irwin.
After cooking, let the leaves cool, but not dry out. Using a
stiff spatula scrape the green covering off of both sides of
each leaf. Then, using a dog brush as a hackle, comb the
leaves to loosten the individual fibers from each other.
After these fibers are dry, comb them again. This produces
finer fiber strands. I then dampened the fiber using
a spray botle, and then spun it into yarn, smoothing it as
one does flax to make linen. After spinning, & plying,
one can singe the still damp yarn to remove the flyaway
strands and make the yarn smoother. It is now ready to
make into sandals.

** Excerpt taken from Spinning and Plying, Anasazistyle
by Bobbie Irwin. First published in Spin-Off Fall
1997. (c) 1997 Bobbie Irwin. Used here with author’s
permission.

Articles Wanted!

With Complex Weavers’ Newsletter becoming Complex
Weavers’ Journal, there has been a call for articles. More
specifically, each coordinator has been given a date by
which they are to have submitted approx. 6 articles. They
can be new, they can be old, they just have to be ready to
go. Ours has to be in Laurie Autio’s hands by February 1,
2000. You can mail or you can e-mail the articles to me.
I have a couple articles now, I’d like to have at least 6,
maybe 7 or more to send off. These would be used in the
Complex Weavers’ Journal, and also be your contribution
to this newsletter. This is a great opportunity for all of us,
please participate.

Spindle Whorls
By Julie Hennessy
An antique dealer gave the whorls in the accompanying
picture to me, approximately 18 months ago, starting me
off on and interesting and of course addictive trail.
The day I received them was that of my Grandfathers
funeral so please excuse me if the details are a bit sketchy
as my mind was on other things at the time. (If any of
you know other details about them I would be delighted to

Bibliography:
Upon my asking members to write articles, I found that
many have difficulty finding material to use to research
your areas of interest. Because of this, I have been on the
lookout for bibliographies with a large number of titles,
hoping that even those of you in remote locations may
find some of these. Here is one such bibliography. It will
be completed in the next newsletter.

************
This document is a work in progress. It is provided as is
without any express or implied warranties. While every
effort has been taken to ensure the accuracy of the
information contained, the author assumes no responsibility
for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from
the use of the information contained herein.
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this document for non-commercial private
research purposes provided the copyright notice and this
permission notice are preserved on all copies.
Just What Exactly is “Whyt Samyt” Anyway? being a
handweaver’s bibliography of sources for technical
information on divers weaves and setts of the Roman
Empire, Middle Ages, and Renaissance
Annotations copyright © 1995, 1997, 1998 Carolyn
Priest-Dorman.

know more.)

The small round whorls (3) and the longer ones (2) are
approx. 2000 years old and came from the area that was
Mesopotamia. All but one are ivory, 2 dyed and 2 undyed.
The black one is stone. The dyes may be madder or
cochineal. If only our modern red dyes would last this
well, the darker of the 2 is almost cerise and the lighter
one is a salmon pink. The gentleman that gave them to
me suggested that the smaller oval whorls were used as
weights for plying.

The large black whorl is made of stone, approx 4000
years old and and from the same area as the others.
As for spinning with these.......like most spinners, I was
taught at one stage to use a spindle......YUK and never
again......that was until I got these home and of course
had to try and see if I could use them. So I took the lighter
of the pink whorls and slipped it over a crochet hook with
a rubber band underneath, put on a lead thread, grabbed a
handful of silk and off......I will never spin silk on
anything else again!!! Immediately I had sewing thread
weight silk with ease. These whorls are perfectly balanced
and absolutely beautiful to work with. Apart from that is
the uncanny feeling of spinning on something that was
last used so long ago.

The small whorls spin silk or cotton beautifully and the
larger stone one is best on a medium to coarse wool.
Nancy McKenna has kindly sent me castings off 2 of her
whorls. These also spin very nicely even though they
appear to have been drilled off centre. I have spun merino
wool on both of these and they are nice to use.
My problem with using my ancient whorls is of course my
fear of breaking them (one already has a crack in it). So
after hearing of Nancy’s reproductions I have cast some
replicas of my own whorls. Crayola Model Magic for the
molds and Fimo for the whorls seems to be a satisfactory
combination (Fimo is approx. the same density as ivory).
After these were cured I drilled the holes on Dads drill
press.

From the little that I have been able to glean from books
etc. these whorls would have been used as support
spindles to spin very fine threads. There are even stories
of women using 2 at a time.....one in each hand!!!! The
large stone whorl is probably a drop spindle as there is no
notch for a high whorl.

If you are interested in seeing pictures of whorls similar to
these there are often pictures of them on e-bay.......look
under antiquities and then search for whorls.
I have also enclosed some samples of silk spun with one
of the ivory whorls. This was spun using the whorl as a
drop spindle and not with support so you can imagine
how much finer you can work with very little difficulty.
All this has led me back to the ancient art of spindle
spinning and over the last year I have made many
spindles of different sizes and weights (none ever as heavy
as the “clunker” that I was taught on) and I use these
wherever I happen to be. And of course my 5-year-old
son’s favourite complaint is “Mum do you have to take
that thing with you AGAIN?”

He should just be grateful that every thread is no longer
spun on a spindle or he might be carrying one
 too.

Description Material Weight Size
Large black stone 28g 35x23mm
Small pink ivory 3.5g 18x6mm
Reproduction fimo 3.5g
Small cerise ivory 4.5g 20x9mm
Small white * ivory 3.5g 18x8mm
Reproduction fimo 3.5g
Black weight stone 3.5g 15x12mm
White weight ivory 2.5g 13x13mm
Nancy’s flat permastone 14g
Nancy’s round permastone 12g
*this whorl is cracked
N.B. all measurements are approximate due to the
equipment available.

Books and Individual Articles
Barber, Elisabeth J.W. Prehistoric Textiles: The Development
of Cloth in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages with
Special Reference to the Aegean. Princeton: Princeton
